Hello, hello hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English.
The show where you can listen to
fascinating stories, and learn weird
and wonderful things about the world at
the same time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today we are going
to be talking about Hostage Negotiations.
This subject is actually
going to be told in two parts.
In this episode, part one, we will
tell the story of two shocking hostage
crises in the early nineteen seventies,
one in Florida, in the United States
and the other in Munich, in Germany.
And in part two, we will look at how the
strange world of hostage negotiations has
developed since then, and look at some
of the strategies and techniques that
law enforcement agencies use to negotiate
with people in a life or death situation.
Ok then, hostage negotiations.
Think of the last time you had
a conversation with someone.
How much of the meaning you both
conveyed was contained in non-verbal
cues like tone of voice and movement?
Psychologists would tell
you that it was a lot.
If subtle signals like this matter
in ordinary conversation, they
matter tenfold in the life-or-death
scenario of hostage negotiations.
Hostage negotiations are the most
nerve-wracking incidents that a
law enforcement team can face.
The hostage taker may have
weapons, threaten violence, and
be determined to follow through.
The police may have more manpower
and weapons than the hostage-taker,
but these capabilities are useless
when the perpetrators could harm
their victims at any moment.
The negotiator must rely on words,
tone, and body language to work
towards a peaceful resolution.
And while “peaceful resolutions” are more
common than ever, even a matter of 50
years ago this was certainly not the case.
Police used to resort to force
much more quickly, and the results
were often not very pretty.
One major US hostage crisis in 1971
highlighted the dangers of this strategy.
At 1.30 am on October the 3rd 1971,
in Nashville, Tennessee, a pilot
named Brent Downs waited on the runway
next to a private charter plane.
He was due to fly three
passengers to Atlanta, Georgia.
He stood on the tarmac
ready to greet them.
The three passengers finally arrived
on the runway and approached the plane.
One of them was George Giffe, the
man who had booked the flight.
He was accompanied by his
estranged wife Susan Giffe and a
man called Bobby Wayne Wallace.
Downs and his co-pilot struck up a
conversation with Giffe, while Susan Giffe
and the other man waited 100 metres away.
Giffe and his companions
seemed ordinary enough.
That was until the woman – Susan - began
screaming that she was being kidnapped.
Downs, the pilot, was concerned
and walked towards her.
George Giffe assured him
that nothing was wrong.
The screaming woman was a mental
patient having a crisis, he said,
and he was her doctor taking
her to Atlanta for treatment.
Downs was still suspicious.
He asked Giffe for proof of his identity.
At this point, Giffe turned a
pistol, a gun, on the pilot.
He claimed he had a bomb.
He and Wallace forced Downs and Susan
into the aircraft and ordered Downs,
the pilot, to quickly take off.
With no other option, the pilot took to
the air, with Giffe, his estranged wife,
and the third man, Bobby Wayne Wallace.
The ground crew quickly alerted the FBI.
When the plane was in the air,
Giffe told Downs to change course
from Atlanta to the Bahamas.
Downs protested, saying that he would need
to refuel in Jacksonville, in Florida.
It was a small plane, and there simply
wasn’t enough fuel to go all the way.
Giffe agreed and Downs called ahead to
the airport at Jacksonville to prepare
charts, fuel, and flotation gear.
At 5.08 am, the aircraft landed
at Jacksonville, Florida,
where the FBI was waiting.
During the flight, the FBI had learned
that George Giffe and Bobby Wayne
Wallace had kidnapped Susan, Giffe’s
estranged wife, as she left for work.
When the plane landed, the pilot
radioed the tower saying that the
hostage takers were armed with handguns.
Giffe claimed to have over 5 kilos
of explosives in his luggage.
Now, the FBI’s priority was to
keep the plane on the ground.
Although this was a prudent strategy,
as it’s clearly easier to negotiate
with someone if they’re in the
same place, not up in an aeroplane,
the FBI soon made its first error.
Almost immediately after the plane had
landed, the primary FBI negotiator J.J.
O’Connor radioed the
hostage takers on the plane.
He refused to give the hostage
takers the fuel they demanded.
This flat-out refusal of a key hostage
demand closed any possibility of
compromise between the agents and
Giffe, and ended lines of communication.
Even the pilot, Brent Downs, knew
how dangerous O’Connor’s refusal was.
In archived footage from the tense 6-
minute standoff, Downs gave the FBI
a fearful warning, saying: “You’re
endangering lives by doing this”.
A few minutes later, Giffe’s
accomplice, Wallace, left the
plane voluntarily and was arrested.
According to commentators after
the event, the FBI should have
taken this as a small victory.
They could have leveraged the departure
of Giffe’s accomplice and used it
to convince Giffe to surrender.
Instead, the FBI chose a
different course of action.
At 5.27 am, the primary negotiator
ordered his agents to shoot.
Bullets pierced the tyres
of the plane as well as the
engine, which was still running.
As soon as the firearms went off, what
was a tense and dangerous situation
tipped over into a deadly one.
Shots were heard inside the plane.
Giffe had shot dead the
pilot, his wife, and himself.
It later turned out that Giffe had been
suffering from a mental health episode.
A few years afterwards, the wife
of the dead pilot sued the FBI for
creating a deadly situation that
could have been peacefully resolved.
She won on appeal, and it was
the first time ever that the FBI
has been sued in a civil suit.
The tragic outcome of this Florida
hijacking underlined how inadequate the
law enforcement agencies were when it
came to saving lives in a hostage crisis.
They simply didn’t know what to do,
and thought that by firing at the
aeroplane Giffe, the man with the gun,
would be frightened into surrendering.
Clearly, he wasn’t.
The shots tipped him over the edge,
and cost the lives of three people.
Less than a year later, a very different
international hostage event finally
shocked law enforcement around the
world into taking the psychological
aspects of negotiation seriously.
This was the 1972 hostage crisis at the
Munich Olympic Games in West Germany.
A serious hostage crisis that the
world watched played out on live TV.
The attack was organised by Black
September, an anti-Israeli terrorist
organisation fighting for the
cause of Palestinian liberation.
Unlike the Florida hijacking, the motives
of the perpetrators were political and
their demands were clear and rigid.
Like in the United States, the
German authorities did not have
a systemic set of procedures for
handling hostage crises at the time.
In hindsight, this was perhaps surprising,
given how politically turbulent the
late sixties and early seventies were.
There were tensions over the war
in Vietnam, nationalism in the
developing world that met pushback
from imperial nations, and the growth
of both right and left wing extremism.
Terror groups cultivated global
networks to train, recruit, and
raise funds for their causes.
One of the sources of extremism was the
1967 brutal war between Egypt and Israel.
It started after Israel was blocked by
Egypt from using a key shipping route.
What followed became known as the 6 Day
War, and resulted in Israel capturing
a lot of territory, including Gaza,
the West Bank, and the Golan Heights.
It also resulted in the capture
of thousands of prisoners, the
displacement of around 300,000
Palestinians, and no simple
diplomatic solution to the situation.
For some Palestinian militant groups, the
only way they thought they could weaken
Israel would be through terror tactics.
And although they had been targeting
Israel before the war, they were
now ready to organise international
attacks that could bring the
world’s attention to their cause.
So, in July 1972, two men, Abu Iyad and
Ali Hassan Salameh, met in a café in Rome.
They were leaders of the militant
Palestinian group, Black September, and
it was then that they decided to target
the upcoming Olympic Games in Munich.
Abu Iyah was the one who first
proposed kidnapping Israeli
athletes to force Israel to
release Palestinians from prison.
They selected seven other young
men to carry out the attack, all
Palestinian refugees from camps
in Lebanon, Syria, and Jordan.
For weeks before the Olympic games
started, the men infiltrated the
Olympic village to understand its
layout and security weaknesses.
Some even got jobs there, giving them
full undercover access to the site.
The Games began on the 26th of August.
On the 5th of September,
the terrorists were ready.
At 4.30 in the morning they snuck
into 31 Connollystrasse, the apartment
block where the Israeli delegation
to the Olympic Games were staying.
They approached apartment
1, which housed 7 Israelis.
An Israeli wrestler, Yossef
Gutfrend, was among them.
He was the first to notice
that something was wrong.
He heard noises outside the door
and watched as it opened slightly.
Beyond it, he glimpsed
a group of armed men.
He shouted to warn his roommates
and threw himself against the door.
He might have been an Olympic
wrestler weighing 135kg, but he
was no match for 8 armed men.
The terrorists overpowered him
and forced him to the floor.
From there, the eight terrorists swept the
building, bedroom by bedroom, until they
had eleven Israeli athletes held hostage.
Shots were fired and the
village started waking up.
At 5 am, the Munich chief of police
was aware of a disaster unfolding
within the Olympic Village.
Soon, the whole world would be
transfixed on Building number 3
of Connollystrasse, in Munich.
Around a billion viewers tuned in
that day to watch the Olympic Park
crisis unfold on their screens.
The terrorists knew they had captured the
attention of the international community,
which is precisely what they had wanted.
They announced their demand and deadline.
The Israeli government must
release Palestinian terrorists
from jail by 9:00 AM or they would
start to execute the hostages.
With only a few hours to comply,
there was no time to waste.
But the German police and security
services were woefully unprepared,
they simply weren’t ready, and despite
the frequent terror hostage incidents
over the early seventies, the security
services were always one step behind.
There was no armed security or
checkpoints at the Munich games.
The institutional make-up of German
security was also badly equipped to
deal with this sort of situation.
In Germany, power is divided among 16
states, each with its own government.
There was no central federal agency
responsible for organising negotiations
efforts, which is critical in a siege
of such international importance.
Instead of federal personnel, Munich
police chief Manfred Schreiber and the
interior minister of Bavaria state, Bruno
Merk, were chosen as primary negotiators
who would communicate with the terrorists.
Appointing the most senior state police
chief as negotiator was, as it would
later transpire, a serious mistake.
Nowadays, a key principle of hostage
negotiation is to appoint a non-senior
member that specialises in hostage
dialogue as the primary negotiator.
This is because a subordinate officer, a
more junior official, can buy more time
by blaming a higher authority for delays
in delivering the terrorists’ demands.
As we’ll see in part two, blaming
other people to buy time is an
important part of hostage negotiation.
Fifteen minutes before the 9 am deadline
for Israel to release prisoners, nothing
had been done to resolve the situation.
At the last moment, the German authorities
sent Olympic delegates from Arab
nations as negotiators for the hostages.
The Egyptian who was chosen for this
appealed to the hostage takers to give
the Israelis and Germans more time.
The plan worked and the
terrorists agreed to extend the
deadline to noon, midday, 12pm.
But then came the next glaring
error in the German response.
The Munich police chief Manfred
Schreiber offered the terrorists $9
million dollars to release the hostages.
It’s over $60 million dollars in
today’s money, an enormous sum.
But offering this amount of
money reflected how badly the
authorities understood the
motives of the hostage takers.
In a terror hostage crisis where the
demands are political, perpetrators
are typically more committed
to their political objectives
than preserving their own lives.
A monetary offer can also imply
that the authorities believe the
terrorists can simply be paid to
give up their political demands.
This risks offending the perpetrators
and inflaming the situation further.
This was certainly the case
with the Munich crisis.
The terrorists didn’t want money, they
wanted their political demands to be
met, for the prisoners to be released.
Israel would not give in to the
terrorists’ demands but the German
authorities had to convince the
terrorists otherwise, to stop
them from killing the hostages.
They sent the Tunisian ambassador
to West Germany to beg the
terrorists to give Israel more time.
They agreed to a 5 pm deadline.
At 4.35 p.m., Issa, the leader of the
terrorists, demanded that the hostage
takers, along with their Israeli hostages,
should be flown to Cairo in Egypt.
The Germans agreed to this and
said a plane would be ready by 7pm.
The airfield chosen was called
Furstenfeldbruck and the terrorists
agreed to be flown there by helicopters
piloted by two Germans and a German crew.
The Germans never planned for the
hostage takers and their hostages to
reach Cairo, their chosen destination.
Unknown to the terrorists, the
Egyptian government was refusing
to allow them to land in Egypt.
The Israelis did not want the
hostages to fly to Egypt either.
Instead, the Germans planned to
rescue the hostages on the airfield
as their captors approached the plane.
The helicopters carrying the hostage
takers and their hostages landed at
Fürstenfeldbruck airfield at 10:40 pm.
By then it was dark and the
airstrip was lit in floodlights.
The German authorities had imposed a media
blackout on the Fürstenfeldbruck airfield.
This was their final chance
to save the Israelis.
Five snipers, people expert at
shooting from a long distance, had
been positioned around the airfield,
invisible to the terrorists.
Shockingly, none of them were given
walkie talkies, meaning that they
could not coordinate with one another.
Other critical items were
missing from their toolkits.
They did not have bulletproof vests
or helmets, and none had infrared or
telescopic sights fitted on their guns.
They were in the dark,
literally and metaphorically.
When Issa and his deputy Yusuf Nazzal
stepped out of the helicopters to
check their plane, they quickly
became suspicious it was a trap and
started to run back to the helicopter.
At that moment, the snipers began
firing, shooting two terrorists
guarding the helicopter pilots.
Next, the snipers fired
on Issa and Nazzal.
Issa was hit but managed to crawl back
to the helicopters, where he began firing
out into the dark with his machine gun.
At this point, all the terrorists
started shooting at the snipers
from the cover of the helicopter.
The scene was chaos.
Nobody could tell which shots
were being fired by whom.
The small team of five snipers could
do nothing to disarm the terrorists.
The firefight lasted for ten
minutes before the Germans
called for armoured backup.
Until they arrived, there
was nothing to do but watch.
In all, one German officer was
killed, several were injured,
and five terrorists were killed.
After the rescue operation came
the final anguish for the loved
ones of the hostages, who had been
anxiously waiting, watching the news.
The media outlet Reuters reported at
12.30 pm that all hostages had survived.
What a triumph!
Unfortunately, it was wrong.
After three hours, Reuters
corrected their report.
All the hostages, 11 Israelis, were lying
dead on this dark, German, airfield.
It would remain a black mark on
the German security services’
reputation for years to come.
Now, even though most countries do have
an explicit policy of “not negotiating
with terrorists”, it was clear that
Munich had been an unmitigated disaster.
And while everything is easy with
the benefit of hindsight, security
forces across the globe started to
develop systems and best practices
for what should have been done.
Systems and practices that we will discuss
in detail in part two, the next episode,
where we will look at the question of
“How To Negotiate With Hostage Takers”
OK then, that is it for today's episode
on The Florida & Munich Hostage Disasters.
I hope it's been an interesting one,
and that you've learnt something new.
As always, I would love to know
what you thought of this episode.
I imagine you might have known
about the Munich Massacre, but
were you aware of what happened
on another airfield in Florida?
What do you think the hostage
negotiators got wrong?
How should they have acted differently?
I would love to know.
You can head right into our
community forum, which is at
community.leonardoenglish.com and get
chatting away to other curious minds.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds, by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.